.TH FIRMWARED 1
.SH NAME
firmwared \- Daemon for spawning and managing drone firmare instances
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B firmwared
[\fICONFIGURATION_FILE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B firmwared
allows to create multiple instances of drone firmwares in containers and to
manage their lifecycle.
It is controlled by a socket, with libpomp for the protocol, so it can be used
with a variety of language.
A command line client,
.BR fdc(1)
is also available.
If a
.B CONFIGURATION_FILE
argument is passed, it will be used to read the configuration, if not,
.B firmwared
will check if
.I /etc/firmwared.conf
exists and load it in this case.
If no configuration file is found, default values or environment are used.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B firmwared
returns 0 on success and 1 on error.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_APPARMOR_PROFILE
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_APPARMOR_PROFILE
is set, it will be used as an alternative implementation for the apparmor
security profile pattern, used for protecting the host pc, from potentially
harmful behavior of the instances, defaults to
.RB $ FIRMWARED_RESOURCES_DIR/firmwared.apparmor.profile .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_CONTAINER_INTERFACE
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_CONTAINER_INTERFACE
is set, it will be used as the name of the network interface created for the
instances to communicate with the host, defaults to
.BR eth0 ,
must be less than 15 characters long.
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_CURL_HOOK
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_CURL_HOOK
is set, its value is used as the path to the helper executable responsible of
copying the firmwares to the firmware repository, defaults to
.BR /usr/libexec/firmwared/curl.hook .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_PORT_HOOK
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_PORT_HOOK
is set, its value is used as the path to the helper executable responsible of
reserving ports, defaults to
.BR /usr/libexec/firmwared/port.hook .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_VERSION_HOOK
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_VERSION_HOOK
is set, its value is used as the path to the helper executable responsible of
displaying the version of firmwared, defaults to
.BR /usr/libexec/firmwared/version.hook .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_DISABLE_APPARMOR
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_DISABLE_APPARMOR
is set to
.BR y ,
AppArmor will not be used for protecting the host against potentially harmful
behaviour of the instances.
Please be aware that this is a dangerous option as it is likely to kill kittens,
you have been warned, defaults to
.BR n .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_DUMP_PROFILE
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_DUMP_PROFILE
is set to
.BR y ,
the AppArmor profile used at each instance creation will be dumped to
firmwared's standard error, defaults to
.BR n .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_HOST_INTERFACE_PREFIX
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_HOST_INTERFACE_PREFIX
is set, then it will be used as the prefix for building the interface name for
the veth pair's end living in the host network namespace, defaults to
.BR fd_veth ,
must be less than 12 characters long.
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_MOUNT_HOOK
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_MOUNT_HOOK
is set, its value is used as the path to the helper executable responsible of
mounting the union fs of an instance and of cleaning it, defaults to
.BR /usr/libexec/firmwared/mount.hook .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_MOUNT_PATH
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_MOUNT_PATH
is set, then the firmware workspaces, that is, their set of mount points, will
be created in this directory.
Under this directory the following subtree will be used :

  +- /instance_sha1/
                   |
                   +- ro (read-only mount point of the firmware)
                   +- rw (directory with the rw layer)
                   +- union (union fs mount of ./rw upon ./ro)
                   +- workdir (used internally by OverlayFS)

defaults to
.BR /var/cache/firmwared/mount_points/ .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_NET_FIRST_TWO_BYTES
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_NET_FIRST_TWO_BYTES
is set, then it will be used as the prefix for building the IP addresses for the
host and the container, defaults to
.BR 10.202. ,
must have the form 'X1.X2.' with X1 and X2 being two integers in [0, 255]
inclusive.
The host veth's end will have X1.X2.INSTANCE_ID.1/24 as its IP address and the
instance's veth's end will have X1.X2.INSTANCE_ID.1/24.
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_NET_HOOK
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_NET_HOOK
is set, its value is used as the path to the helper executable responsible of
creating the veth pair and configuring it, defaults to
.BR /usr/libexec/firmwared/net.hook .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_UDEV_HOOK
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_UDEV_HOOK
is set, its value is used as the path to the helper executable responsible of
calling udev scripts for each instance, defaults to
.BR /usr/libexec/firmwared/udev.hook .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_POST_PREPARE_INSTANCE_HOOK
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_POST_PREPARE_INSTANCE_HOOK
is set, its value is used as the path to the helper executable responsible of
applying the right permission and ownership to the firmware's files, defaults to
.BR /usr/libexec/firmwared/post_prepare_instance.hook .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_PREVENT_REMOVAL
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_PREVENT_REMOVAL
is set to
.BR y ,
after dropping an instance, its run artifacts will be preserved, that is, the
FIRMWARED_MOUNT_PATH/instance_sha1 directory will
.I not
be destroyed, defaults to
.BR n .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_RESOURCES_DIR
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_RESOURCES_DIR
is set, its value is used as the path to the directory where the resource files
used by
.B firmwared
are stored.
There should be three files in this directory, names, adjectives and
apparmor.profile, defaults to
.BR /usr/share/firmwared/ .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_REPOSITORY_PATH
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_REPOSITORY_PATH
is set, its value is used as the path to the directory in which the firmwares
filesystem images are stored, defaults to
.BR /usr/share/firmwared/firmwares/ .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_SOCKET_PATH
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_SOCKET_PATH
is set, its value is used as the path to the socket used to control firmwared,
defaults to
.BR /var/run/firmwared.sock .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_X11_PATH
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_X11_PATH
is set, its value is used as the path to the directory that contains the socket
used to communicate with the X-Server, defaults to
.BR /tmp/.X11-unix/ .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_MAX_CACHED_FIRMWARES
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_MAX_CACHED_FIRMWARES
is set, its value is used as the maximal amount of firmware ext2 files that can
be stored in firmwared cache, defaults to
.BR 10 .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_HOSTLIBS_PATHS
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_HOSTLIBS_PATHS
is set, it will be interpreted as a colon-delimited list of host system library
paths to be mounted in the firmware and made accessible to it. It has the same
format as LD_LIBRARY_PATH. Defaults to
.BR /lib:/usr/lib .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_VERBOSE_HOOK_SCRIPTS
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_VERBOSE_HOOK_SCRIPTS
is set to
.BR y ,
the hook scripts used, provided they are the stock ones, will log all the
actions they take.
The logs will occur in warning level, due to restrictions on the 'set' shell
built-in.
If you use custom hook scripts, you'll have to retrieve the last parameter value
and to use the set -x command, to replicate this behavior.
You can take the provided examples as examples on how to do so.
Defaults to
.BR n .
.TP
.B FIRMWARED_KEEP_FD_OPEN
If
.RB $ FIRMWARED_KEEP_FD_OPEN
is set to
.BR y ,
firmwared will not close standard file descriptors and get early boxinit output
on firmwared's stdout. This can be useful when an instance crashes immediately.
Defaults to
.BR n .

.SH FILES
.TP
.I $FIRMWARED_MOUNT_HOOK
Helper executable responsible of instances' mount points management.
.TP
.I $FIRMWARED_NET_HOOK
Helper executable responsible of instances' network interfaces management.
.TP
.I $FIRMWARED_RESOURCES_DIR/names
List of names, used in the generation of entities unique names.
.TP
.I $FIRMWARED_RESOURCES_DIR/adjectives
List of adjectives, used in the generation of entities unique names.
.TP
.I $FIRMWARED_RESOURCES_DIR/firmwared.apparmor.profile
Template AppArmor profile, used to protect the host machine from potentially
dangerous behaviour of the instances.

.SH BUGS
.B firmwared
is in its early stage and some bugs are may still be present.
Please report any bug found.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Nicolas Carrier <nicolas.carrier@parrot.com>.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fdc (1),
.BR firmwared.conf (5),
.BR apparmor (7),
